Add analyzer redirecting proposal (#42437)
dotnet/sdk: documentation/general/analyzer-redirecting.md

# Redirecting analyzers in SDK to VS

We will redirect analyzers from the SDK to ones deployed in the VS to avoid the [torn SDK][torn-sdk] issue.

> Only major versions will be redirected because different major versions of the same analyzer are not compatible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only major versions will be redirected because different major versions of the same analyzer cannot be assumed to be compatible.
```

So this applies to a situation like:
- Having an analyzer in SDK 9.0.1 referencing Roslyn 4.12. That gets deployed to VS 17.12.
- Having an analyzer in SDK 9.0.7 referencing Roslyn 4.13.
- User loads project with SDK 9.0.7 in VS 17.12.
  Previously the analyzers would fail to load as they reference newer Roslyn version (4.13) than what is part of VS (4.12).
  Now we will redirect the analyzers to those from SDK 9.0.1 that are deployed as part of VS and reference the matching Roslyn (4.12).

Loading analyzers with older major version should not be a problem because they must reference an older version of Roslyn.

> Loading analyzers with newer major version in an old VS will result in an error like:

Reviewer: May want to specify that this is the existing behavior. Basically the proposal isn't causing this to happen.

> > error NETSDK1045: The current .NET SDK does not support targeting .NET 10.0.  Either target .NET 9.0 or lower, or use a version of the .NET SDK that supports .NET 10.0. Download the .NET SDK from

Reviewer: Confused by this error. This is the error about TFM targetting while analyzer load errors are generally about the compiler version.

Author: If you try to load a new .NET SDK in an old VS, you will get this error even before the analyzers are loaded, I think.

Reviewer: Think that is only true if you also target the new TFM.

Author: That makes sense. So if a user has SDK 10 (with analyzers 10.\*), a project targeting .NET 9, and VS 17.12 (with inserted analyzers 9.\*), we won't redirect the analyzers because major versions don't match, and they will fail with the roslyn mismatch errors.

I don't understand how would this work in command-line builds though. If the SDK 10 only contains 10.\* analyzers, and a project targets .NET 9, we shouldn't use the 10.\* analyzers because they might not be compatible with the 9.\* analyzers, right?

Author: Looks like command-line builds use the older pack or download it if it doesn't exist, but they still load some analyzers from the current version:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/41133f83-9df2-40d5-8797-2a7af8bd1082)

But in VS we won't have the analyzers from the older pack nor we can load the current analyzers because they might be incompatible. So I guess we will just error.

Author: `dotnet new console` with net 9 preview 6 with tfm net8.0

- The SDK will contain [a mapping file][file-format] listing the analyzers that want to [dual-insert][dual-insert] into VS.

- Those analyzers will be deployed with VS in some `{VS-analyzers}` folder
  (to be determined, could be something like `C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio\2022\Preview\Common7\IDE\DotNetAnalyzers`).

  - This will happen as part of the SDK being inserted into VS.
  
  - The mapping file [will be used][vs-insertions] to automatically gather all the analyzers.

  - The mapping file will be deployed there as well (at `{VS-analyzers}\mapping.txt`) so Roslyn can read it.

    - If multiple SDKs are inserted into VS, the most recent version wins.
      The mapping file should be backwards-compatible (we should not remove patterns from it).

- Roslyn [will use][roslyn-redirecting] the mapping file to redirect analyzer loads from SDK to VS.

  - If the file is not found at `{VS-analyzers}\mapping.txt`, analyzer loading continues normally from SDK.

  - If a DLL load is requested which matches a mapping, it is redirected via the [IAnalyzerAssemblyResolver][analyzer-assembly-resolver] infrastructure.

## Mapping file format
[file-format]: #mapping-file-format

> The mapping file v1 is a simple list of directory "patterns". For example:

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we could just re-use analyzer config for this? It seems like a very similar format, and we already have a very hardened parser for it in Roslyn, which today already has logic for 'does this thing match this pattern'.

Author: I was also thinking about that, the parser seems to have some editor config specific quirks like https://github.com/dotnet/roslyn/blob/52e29db514078c9f1bcf6d4c01a106d69f95d63b/src/Compilers/Core/Portable/CommandLine/AnalyzerConfig.SectionNameMatching.cs#L89 so not sure if it's a good fit

```
packs/Microsoft.NETCore.App.Ref/*/analyzers/dotnet/cs
sdk/*/Sdks/Microsoft.NET.Sdk/analyzers
sdk/*/Sdks/Microsoft.NET.Sdk.Web/analyzers/cs
```

Each pattern can contain a single asterisk `*` where a version is expected.

Lines starting with `#` are ignored (can be used as comments).

### Inserting analyzers into VS
[vs-insertions]: #inserting-analyzers-into-vs

The file is used to copy analyzers into VS.
The paths start at the dotnet root.
Only the major version from the `*` part is preserved.
Rest of the path is preserved in the destination.
So for example given the following pattern

```
packs/Microsoft.NETCore.App.Ref/*/analyzers
```

we copy

```
{dotnet-root}\packs\Microsoft.NETCore.App.Ref\8.0.7\analyzers\**
```

into

```
{VS-analyzers}\packs\Microsoft.NETCore.App.Ref\8\analyzers\**
```

If multiple SDKs are inserted into VS,
they should have different major versions,
but if there are two SDKs trying to copy the same pattern with the same major version,

> only the more recent SDK should win.

Reviewer: Hmm ... I wonder if we should error to make sure there isn't an accidental conflict. Basically the assumption being that we shouldn't be inserting the same analyzer version from two different SDKs so error if it happens. If it happens and there is a legitimate use case then we can re-evaluate.

  to the corresponding DLL deployed via the VSIX.
  Details of this process are described below.

- Note that when `IAnalyzerAssemblyRedirector` is involved, Roslyn is free to not use shadow copy loading and instead load the DLLs directly.

## Details

The VSIX contains some analyzers, for example:

```
AspNetCoreAnalyzers\9.0.0-preview.5.24306.11\analyzers\dotnet\cs\Microsoft.AspNetCore.App.Analyzers.dll
NetCoreAnalyzers\9.0.0-preview.5.24306.7\analyzers\dotnet\cs\System.Text.RegularExpressions.Generator.dll
WindowsDesktopAnalyzers\9.0.0-preview.5.24306.8\analyzers\dotnet\System.Windows.Forms.Analyzers.dll
SDKAnalyzers\9.0.100-dev\Sdks\Microsoft.NET.Sdk\analyzers\Microsoft.CodeAnalysis.NetAnalyzers.dll
WebSDKAnalyzers\9.0.100-dev\Sdks\Microsoft.NET.Sdk.Web\analyzers\cs\Microsoft.AspNetCore.Analyzers.dll
```

Given an analyzer assembly load going through our `IAnalyzerAssemblyRedirector`,
we will redirect it if the original path of the assembly being loaded matches the path of a VSIX-deployed analyzer -
only segments of these paths starting after the version segment are compared,
plus the major and minor component of the versions must match.

> For example, analyzer

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, the analyzer
```

```
C:\Program Files\dotnet\sdk\9.0.100-preview.5.24307.3\Sdks\Microsoft.NET.Sdk\analyzers\Microsoft.CodeAnalysis.NetAnalyzers.dll
```

will be redirected to

```
{VSIX}\SDKAnalyzers\9.0.100-dev\Sdks\Microsoft.NET.Sdk\analyzers\Microsoft.CodeAnalysis.NetAnalyzers.dll
```

because
1. the suffix `Sdks\Microsoft.NET.Sdk\analyzers\Microsoft.CodeAnalysis.NetAnalyzers.dll` matches, and

> 2. the version `9.0.100-preview.5.24307.3` has the same major and minor component (`9.0`) as the version `9.0.100-dev`.

Reviewer 3: Think this needs to be a bit more crisp on how the version is being calculated. Is it coming from the path, or are we looking at the dependencies of the dll?

Author: Clarified - versions are read from the path.

Analyzers that cannot be matched will continue to be loaded from the SDK

> (and will fail to load if they reference Roslyn that is newer than the VS).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
(and will fail to load if they reference Roslyn that is newer than is in VS).
```
